docs/arc42/05_building_blocks.adoc, before:

== 5. Building Block View

This chapter describes the static decomposition of the system into its key building blocks. We use the C4 model to illustrate the structure at different levels of detail.

=== 5.1 Level 2: System Containers

The MCP Documentation Server system is composed of two main containers: a web-based user interface and the back-end API server. The file system acts as the system's database.

[plantuml, container-overview, svg]
----
@startuml
!include <C4/C4_Container>
LAYOUT_TOP_DOWN()
SHOW_LEGEND()

title Container diagram for MCP Documentation Server

Person(user, "Developer / Architect", "Uses the system via an MCP client or web browser.")

System_Boundary(mcp_system, "MCP Documentation Server") {
    Container(spa, "Web Interface", "JavaScript, HTML, CSS", "Provides a visual representation of the document structure and modification diffs.")
    Container(api, "MCP API Server", "Python, FastAPI", "Provides MCP-compliant API for structured document access and manipulation.")
}

System_Ext(file_system, "File System", "Stores the AsciiDoc and Markdown files.")

Rel(user, spa, "Uses", "HTTPS")
Rel(user, api, "Makes API calls via MCP Client", "HTTPS")
Rel(spa, api, "Makes API calls", "HTTPS/JSON")
Rel(api, file_system, "Reads/Writes", "File System API")
@enduml
----

=== 5.2 Level 3: Components of the MCP API Server

We now zoom into the `MCP API Server` container. It is composed of several components, each with a distinct responsibility, reflecting a classic layered architecture.

[plantuml, component-detail-api, svg]
----
@startuml
!include <C4/C4_Component>
LAYOUT_WITH_LEGEND()

title Component diagram for MCP API Server

Container_Boundary(api, "MCP API Server") {
    Component(api_endpoints, "API Endpoints", "FastAPI", "Receives MCP requests, validates input, and returns responses.")
    Component(doc_service, "Document Service", "Python", "Orchestrates the business logic for use cases like get_section or update_section.")
    Component(parser, "Document Parser", "Python", "Parses AsciiDoc/Markdown files, resolves includes, and builds an Abstract Syntax Tree (AST).")
    Component(index, "Structure Index", "Python (In-Memory Dictionary)", "Stores the hierarchical structure of the documentation project for fast lookups.")
    Component(fs_handler, "File System Handler", "Python", "Performs atomic read/write operations on the file system.")
}

System_Ext(file_system, "File System")

Rel(api_endpoints, doc_service, "Uses", "Executes business logic")
Rel(doc_service, parser, "Uses", "To get document AST on initialization")
Rel(doc_service, index, "Uses", "To find section locations")
Rel(doc_service, fs_handler, "Uses", "To read/write file content")

Rel(parser, fs_handler, "Reads files via")
Rel(index, parser, "Is built by")
Rel(fs_handler, file_system, "Interacts with")
@enduml
----

> **Note:** The diagram above shows the initial design. Section 5.3 documents the actual implemented modular architecture (Oct 2025) based on ADR-006.

=== 5.3 Modular MCP Server Architecture (Actual Implementation)

Following the refactoring documented in **ADR-006**, the MCP API Server was split into focused modules to comply with the <500 lines constraint and improve maintainability. This section describes the **actual implemented architecture** as of October 2025.

==== Architectural Overview

The MCP Server follows an **Extract-and-Delegate pattern** with **Dependency Injection**:

[plantuml, modular-architecture, svg]
----
@startuml
!include <C4/C4_Component>
LAYOUT_WITH_LEGEND()

title Modular MCP Server Architecture (Actual Implementation)

Container_Boundary(server, "MCP Documentation Server") {
    Component(orchestrator, "MCPDocumentationServer", "mcp_server.py (290 lines)", "Thin orchestrator with dependency injection")
    Component(doc_api, "DocumentAPI", "document_api.py (435 lines)", "All document operations")
    Component(fastmcp, "FastMCP SDK", "mcp.server.fastmcp", "MCP protocol handling via decorators")
    Component(webserver_mgr, "WebserverManager", "webserver_manager.py (121 lines)", "Web server lifecycle")
    Component(parser, "DocumentParser", "document_parser.py", "AsciiDoc/Markdown parsing")
    Component(editor, "ContentEditor", "content_editor.py", "File modification")
    Component(watcher, "FileWatcher", "file_watcher.py", "File system monitoring")
}

Rel(orchestrator, doc_api, "delegates to", "get_structure(), search(), etc.")
Rel(orchestrator, fastmcp, "registers tools with", "@mcp.tool() decorators")
Rel(orchestrator, webserver_mgr, "manages", "web server lifecycle")
Rel(orchestrator, parser, "initializes", "at startup")
Rel(orchestrator, editor, "provides to", "content modifications")
Rel(orchestrator, watcher, "starts", "for auto-refresh")

Rel(doc_api, orchestrator, "accesses state via", "self.server.sections")
Rel(fastmcp, doc_api, "routes tool calls to", "via global _server instance")
Rel(webserver_mgr, orchestrator, "accesses", "server instance")
@enduml
----

==== Module Responsibilities

[cols="1,2,2,1"]
|===
| Module | Responsibility | Key Methods | Lines

| **mcp_server.py**
| Server orchestration, MCP tool registration
| `__init__()`, `cleanup()`, `@mcp.tool()` decorators (10 tools), delegation methods
| 290

| **document_api.py**
| All document operations
| `get_structure()`, `get_section()`, `search_content()`, `get_metadata()`, `update_section_content()`, `insert_section()`
| 435

| **FastMCP SDK**
| MCP protocol handling (external dependency)
| `FastMCP()`, `mcp.run()`, automatic schema generation via type hints
| mcp[cli]>=1.0.0

| **webserver_manager.py**
| Web server lifecycle
| `find_free_port()`, `start_webserver_thread()`, `get_webserver_status()`
| 121

| **document_parser.py**
| Parsing logic
| `parse_file()`, `resolve_includes()`
| 82

| **content_editor.py**
| File modifications
| `update_section()`, atomic writes
| 46

| **file_watcher.py**
| File system monitoring
| `start()`, `_on_modified()`
| 64
|===

**Total: 1,229 lines across 7 focused modules** (vs 916 lines in monolithic mcp_server.py)

==== Dependency Injection Pattern

The orchestrator (`MCPDocumentationServer`) creates and injects dependencies:

[source,python]
----
class MCPDocumentationServer:
    def __init__(self, project_root: Path, enable_webserver: bool = True):
        # Core components
        self.parser = DocumentParser()
        self.editor = ContentEditor(project_root)
        self.diff_engine = DiffEngine()

        # Shared state
        self.sections = {}  # In-memory index
        self.root_files = []
        self.included_files = set()

        # Modular components (dependency injection)
        self.doc_api = DocumentAPI(self)  # Receives server instance
        self.webserver = WebserverManager(self)

        # Initialize
        self._discover_root_files()
        self._parse_project()
        self.file_watcher = FileWatcher(project_root, self._on_files_changed)
----

Each module receives `self` (the server instance) to access shared state:

[source,python]
----
class DocumentAPI:
    def __init__(self, server: 'MCPDocumentationServer'):
        self.server = server  # Access to sections, parser, editor

    def get_structure(self, max_depth: int = 3):
        # Accesses self.server.sections
        return self._build_hierarchy(self.server.sections, max_depth)
----

**Mental Model:** *"Modules are pure logic, orchestrator holds state"*

This pattern avoids circular dependencies while maintaining clear ownership.

==== Module Interactions

**Typical MCP Request Flow (FastMCP SDK):**

1. **MCP Client** → sends JSON-RPC request via stdin
2. **FastMCP SDK** → `mcp.run()` receives and parses request
3. **FastMCP SDK** → routes to decorated tool (e.g., `@mcp.tool() def get_structure()`)
4. **Tool Function** → accesses `_server.doc_api.get_structure()` (global instance)
5. **document_api.py** → executes business logic, accesses `self.server.sections` (shared state)
6. **FastMCP SDK** → automatically serializes return value to JSON-RPC response
7. **MCP Client** → receives JSON-RPC response via stdout

**File Modification Flow:**

1. **DocumentAPI** → `update_section_content(path, content)`
2. **DocumentAPI** → calls `self.server.editor.update_section()`
3. **ContentEditor** → atomic write via backup-and-replace (ADR-004)
4. **FileWatcher** → detects change
5. **MCPDocumentationServer** → `_on_files_changed()` → re-parses
6. **Sections Index** → updated with new content

==== Design Rationale (Mental Model)

**Why this modular split?** (See ADR-006 for full rationale)

1. **Cognitive Load Management**
   - Mental Model: "One module = one mental context"
   - 500 lines ≈ maximum cognitive capacity for understanding a file
   - Each module can be understood independently

2. **Testability**
   - Each module testable in isolation
   - Result: 82% coverage (vs ~50% before modularization)

3. **Parallel Development**
   - Different concerns = different modules
   - Reduced merge conflicts

4. **Clear Ownership**
   - Document operations → document_api.py
   - Protocol concerns → FastMCP SDK (external dependency, ADR-009)
   - Web server → webserver_manager.py
   - No ambiguity about "where does this code go?"

**Trade-off:** Delegation adds minor indirection overhead
**Justification:** Clarity gain >>> performance cost

=== 5.4 Data Structures

This section documents the core data structures that represent the document model.

==== Section (Document Node)

The fundamental unit of the document hierarchy:

[source,python]
----
@dataclass
class Section:
    """Represents a logical section in the documentation"""

    id: str              # Hierarchical path, e.g., "chapter-1.section-2"
    title: str           # Section title (from heading)
    content: str         # Text content of this section
    level: int           # Heading level (1=chapter, 2=section, 3=subsection, etc.)
    children: List[str]  # IDs of child sections (hierarchical structure)
    source_file: str     # Path to source .adoc/.md file
    line_start: int      # Start line in source file (1-indexed)
    line_end: int        # End line in source file (inclusive)
----

**Mental Model:** *"A Section is a logical chunk, not a file chunk"*

Key insights:
- `id` encodes hierarchy: "chapter-1.section-2.subsection-3"
- `source_file` + `line_start`/`line_end` enable precise file editing
- Multiple sections can come from one file (via includes)
- One section's content can span multiple files (via includes)

**Example:**

----
docs/architecture.adoc (lines 1-100):
  Section(id="architecture-documentation", level=1, line_start=1, line_end=2)
  Section(id="architecture-documentation.introduction", level=2, line_start=3, line_end=10)

_introduction.adoc (lines 1-50) [included by architecture.adoc]:
  Section(id="architecture-documentation.introduction.goals", level=3, line_start=1, line_end=20)
----

==== Structure Index (In-Memory)

The server maintains an in-memory index for O(1) lookups:

[source,python]
----
class MCPDocumentationServer:
    sections: Dict[str, Section]  # id → Section mapping
    root_files: List[Path]        # Files not included by others
    included_files: Set[Path]     # Files included by others
----

**Performance:**
- Lookup by ID: O(1)
- All sections at level N: O(n) linear scan
- Search by query: O(n) with early termination

**Memory:**
- ~600 pages ≈ ~1000 sections
- ~1000 sections × ~1KB/section ≈ 1MB in-memory
- Acceptable trade-off for instant access

==== Include Graph

Tracked implicitly via `source_file` and `included_files`:

----
root_files = [main.adoc, other.adoc]
included_files = [_intro.adoc, _glossary.adoc]

Logical structure:
  main.adoc
    ├── Section from main.adoc
    ├── Section from _intro.adoc (included)
    └── Section from _glossary.adoc (included)
----

**Mental Model:** *"Includes are flattened during parsing, tracked for navigation"*

The parser resolves includes recursively, flattening the logical document tree while preserving file provenance for editing.

Commit message:

docs: add search relevance algorithm documentation to arc42
- Added detailed documentation of search relevance scoring algorithm
- Located in section 5.3 Module Responsibilities after building blocks table
- Includes algorithm implementation, scoring logic, usage context, and examples
- Algorithm uses 2x weight for title matches, 1x for content matches
- Verified AsciiDoc rendering and integration with existing documentation

docs/arc42/05_building_blocks.adoc, after:

== 5. Building Block View

This chapter describes the static decomposition of the system into its key building blocks. We use the C4 model to illustrate the structure at different levels of detail.

=== 5.1 Level 2: System Containers

The MCP Documentation Server system is composed of two main containers: a web-based user interface and the back-end API server. The file system acts as the system's database.

[plantuml, container-overview, svg]
----
@startuml
!include <C4/C4_Container>
LAYOUT_TOP_DOWN()
SHOW_LEGEND()

title Container diagram for MCP Documentation Server

Person(user, "Developer / Architect", "Uses the system via an MCP client or web browser.")

System_Boundary(mcp_system, "MCP Documentation Server") {
    Container(spa, "Web Interface", "JavaScript, HTML, CSS", "Provides a visual representation of the document structure and modification diffs.")
    Container(api, "MCP API Server", "Python, FastAPI", "Provides MCP-compliant API for structured document access and manipulation.")
}

System_Ext(file_system, "File System", "Stores the AsciiDoc and Markdown files.")

Rel(user, spa, "Uses", "HTTPS")
Rel(user, api, "Makes API calls via MCP Client", "HTTPS")
Rel(spa, api, "Makes API calls", "HTTPS/JSON")
Rel(api, file_system, "Reads/Writes", "File System API")
@enduml
----

=== 5.2 Level 3: Components of the MCP API Server

We now zoom into the `MCP API Server` container. It is composed of several components, each with a distinct responsibility, reflecting a classic layered architecture.

[plantuml, component-detail-api, svg]
----
@startuml
!include <C4/C4_Component>
LAYOUT_WITH_LEGEND()

title Component diagram for MCP API Server

Container_Boundary(api, "MCP API Server") {
    Component(api_endpoints, "API Endpoints", "FastAPI", "Receives MCP requests, validates input, and returns responses.")
    Component(doc_service, "Document Service", "Python", "Orchestrates the business logic for use cases like get_section or update_section.")
    Component(parser, "Document Parser", "Python", "Parses AsciiDoc/Markdown files, resolves includes, and builds an Abstract Syntax Tree (AST).")
    Component(index, "Structure Index", "Python (In-Memory Dictionary)", "Stores the hierarchical structure of the documentation project for fast lookups.")
    Component(fs_handler, "File System Handler", "Python", "Performs atomic read/write operations on the file system.")
}

System_Ext(file_system, "File System")

Rel(api_endpoints, doc_service, "Uses", "Executes business logic")
Rel(doc_service, parser, "Uses", "To get document AST on initialization")
Rel(doc_service, index, "Uses", "To find section locations")
Rel(doc_service, fs_handler, "Uses", "To read/write file content")

Rel(parser, fs_handler, "Reads files via")
Rel(index, parser, "Is built by")
Rel(fs_handler, file_system, "Interacts with")
@enduml
----

> **Note:** The diagram above shows the initial design. Section 5.3 documents the actual implemented modular architecture (Oct 2025) based on ADR-006.

=== 5.3 Modular MCP Server Architecture (Actual Implementation)

Following the refactoring documented in **ADR-006**, the MCP API Server was split into focused modules to comply with the <500 lines constraint and improve maintainability. This section describes the **actual implemented architecture** as of October 2025.

==== Architectural Overview

The MCP Server follows an **Extract-and-Delegate pattern** with **Dependency Injection**:

[plantuml, modular-architecture, svg]
----
@startuml
!include <C4/C4_Component>
LAYOUT_WITH_LEGEND()

title Modular MCP Server Architecture (Actual Implementation)

Container_Boundary(server, "MCP Documentation Server") {
    Component(orchestrator, "MCPDocumentationServer", "mcp_server.py (290 lines)", "Thin orchestrator with dependency injection")
    Component(doc_api, "DocumentAPI", "document_api.py (435 lines)", "All document operations")
    Component(fastmcp, "FastMCP SDK", "mcp.server.fastmcp", "MCP protocol handling via decorators")
    Component(webserver_mgr, "WebserverManager", "webserver_manager.py (121 lines)", "Web server lifecycle")
    Component(parser, "DocumentParser", "document_parser.py", "AsciiDoc/Markdown parsing")
    Component(editor, "ContentEditor", "content_editor.py", "File modification")
    Component(watcher, "FileWatcher", "file_watcher.py", "File system monitoring")
}

Rel(orchestrator, doc_api, "delegates to", "get_structure(), search(), etc.")
Rel(orchestrator, fastmcp, "registers tools with", "@mcp.tool() decorators")
Rel(orchestrator, webserver_mgr, "manages", "web server lifecycle")
Rel(orchestrator, parser, "initializes", "at startup")
Rel(orchestrator, editor, "provides to", "content modifications")
Rel(orchestrator, watcher, "starts", "for auto-refresh")

Rel(doc_api, orchestrator, "accesses state via", "self.server.sections")
Rel(fastmcp, doc_api, "routes tool calls to", "via global _server instance")
Rel(webserver_mgr, orchestrator, "accesses", "server instance")
@enduml
----

==== Module Responsibilities

[cols="1,2,2,1"]
|===
| Module | Responsibility | Key Methods | Lines

| **mcp_server.py**
| Server orchestration, MCP tool registration
| `__init__()`, `cleanup()`, `@mcp.tool()` decorators (10 tools), delegation methods
| 290

| **document_api.py**
| All document operations
| `get_structure()`, `get_section()`, `search_content()`, `get_metadata()`, `update_section_content()`, `insert_section()`
| 435

| **FastMCP SDK**
| MCP protocol handling (external dependency)
| `FastMCP()`, `mcp.run()`, automatic schema generation via type hints
| mcp[cli]>=1.0.0

| **webserver_manager.py**
| Web server lifecycle
| `find_free_port()`, `start_webserver_thread()`, `get_webserver_status()`
| 121

| **document_parser.py**
| Parsing logic
| `parse_file()`, `resolve_includes()`
| 82

| **content_editor.py**
| File modifications
| `update_section()`, atomic writes
| 46

| **file_watcher.py**
| File system monitoring
| `start()`, `_on_modified()`
| 64
|===

**Total: 1,229 lines across 7 focused modules** (vs 916 lines in monolithic mcp_server.py)

==== Search Relevance Algorithm

The `document_api.py` module implements a search relevance scoring algorithm used to rank search results returned by the `search_content()` method.

**Algorithm Implementation:**
The relevance scoring is calculated in the `_calculate_relevance()` method using the following logic:

[source,python]
----
def _calculate_relevance(self, section: Section, query: str) -> float:
    """Simple relevance scoring"""
    title_matches = section.title.lower().count(query)
    content_matches = section.content.lower().count(query)
    return title_matches * 2 + content_matches
----

**Scoring Logic:**
- **Title matches**: Weighted with factor 2 (higher importance)
- **Content matches**: Weighted with factor 1 (standard importance)
- **Total score**: Sum of weighted matches

**Usage Context:**
This algorithm is used within the search functionality to provide more relevant results by prioritizing documents where search terms appear in titles over those where terms only appear in content.

**Example:**
- Document with 1 title match + 3 content matches: Score = (1 × 2) + (3 × 1) = 5
- Document with 0 title matches + 5 content matches: Score = (0 × 2) + (5 × 1) = 5
- The first document would be considered more relevant due to the title match

==== Dependency Injection Pattern

The orchestrator (`MCPDocumentationServer`) creates and injects dependencies:

[source,python]
----
class MCPDocumentationServer:
    def __init__(self, project_root: Path, enable_webserver: bool = True):
        # Core components
        self.parser = DocumentParser()
        self.editor = ContentEditor(project_root)
        self.diff_engine = DiffEngine()

        # Shared state
        self.sections = {}  # In-memory index
        self.root_files = []
        self.included_files = set()

        # Modular components (dependency injection)
        self.doc_api = DocumentAPI(self)  # Receives server instance
        self.webserver = WebserverManager(self)

        # Initialize
        self._discover_root_files()
        self._parse_project()
        self.file_watcher = FileWatcher(project_root, self._on_files_changed)
----

Each module receives `self` (the server instance) to access shared state:

[source,python]
----
class DocumentAPI:
    def __init__(self, server: 'MCPDocumentationServer'):
        self.server = server  # Access to sections, parser, editor

    def get_structure(self, max_depth: int = 3):
        # Accesses self.server.sections
        return self._build_hierarchy(self.server.sections, max_depth)
----

**Mental Model:** *"Modules are pure logic, orchestrator holds state"*

This pattern avoids circular dependencies while maintaining clear ownership.

==== Module Interactions

**Typical MCP Request Flow (FastMCP SDK):**

1. **MCP Client** → sends JSON-RPC request via stdin
2. **FastMCP SDK** → `mcp.run()` receives and parses request
3. **FastMCP SDK** → routes to decorated tool (e.g., `@mcp.tool() def get_structure()`)
4. **Tool Function** → accesses `_server.doc_api.get_structure()` (global instance)
5. **document_api.py** → executes business logic, accesses `self.server.sections` (shared state)
6. **FastMCP SDK** → automatically serializes return value to JSON-RPC response
7. **MCP Client** → receives JSON-RPC response via stdout

**File Modification Flow:**

1. **DocumentAPI** → `update_section_content(path, content)`
2. **DocumentAPI** → calls `self.server.editor.update_section()`
3. **ContentEditor** → atomic write via backup-and-replace (ADR-004)
4. **FileWatcher** → detects change
5. **MCPDocumentationServer** → `_on_files_changed()` → re-parses
6. **Sections Index** → updated with new content

==== Design Rationale (Mental Model)

**Why this modular split?** (See ADR-006 for full rationale)

1. **Cognitive Load Management**
   - Mental Model: "One module = one mental context"
   - 500 lines ≈ maximum cognitive capacity for understanding a file
   - Each module can be understood independently

2. **Testability**
   - Each module testable in isolation
   - Result: 82% coverage (vs ~50% before modularization)

3. **Parallel Development**
   - Different concerns = different modules
   - Reduced merge conflicts

4. **Clear Ownership**
   - Document operations → document_api.py
   - Protocol concerns → FastMCP SDK (external dependency, ADR-009)
   - Web server → webserver_manager.py
   - No ambiguity about "where does this code go?"

**Trade-off:** Delegation adds minor indirection overhead
**Justification:** Clarity gain >>> performance cost

=== 5.4 Data Structures

This section documents the core data structures that represent the document model.

==== Section (Document Node)

The fundamental unit of the document hierarchy:

[source,python]
----
@dataclass
class Section:
    """Represents a logical section in the documentation"""

    id: str              # Hierarchical path, e.g., "chapter-1.section-2"
    title: str           # Section title (from heading)
    content: str         # Text content of this section
    level: int           # Heading level (1=chapter, 2=section, 3=subsection, etc.)
    children: List[str]  # IDs of child sections (hierarchical structure)
    source_file: str     # Path to source .adoc/.md file
    line_start: int      # Start line in source file (1-indexed)
    line_end: int        # End line in source file (inclusive)
----

**Mental Model:** *"A Section is a logical chunk, not a file chunk"*

Key insights:
- `id` encodes hierarchy: "chapter-1.section-2.subsection-3"
- `source_file` + `line_start`/`line_end` enable precise file editing
- Multiple sections can come from one file (via includes)
- One section's content can span multiple files (via includes)

**Example:**

----
docs/architecture.adoc (lines 1-100):
  Section(id="architecture-documentation", level=1, line_start=1, line_end=2)
  Section(id="architecture-documentation.introduction", level=2, line_start=3, line_end=10)

_introduction.adoc (lines 1-50) [included by architecture.adoc]:
  Section(id="architecture-documentation.introduction.goals", level=3, line_start=1, line_end=20)
----

==== Structure Index (In-Memory)

The server maintains an in-memory index for O(1) lookups:

[source,python]
----
class MCPDocumentationServer:
    sections: Dict[str, Section]  # id → Section mapping
    root_files: List[Path]        # Files not included by others
    included_files: Set[Path]     # Files included by others
----

**Performance:**
- Lookup by ID: O(1)
- All sections at level N: O(n) linear scan
- Search by query: O(n) with early termination

**Memory:**
- ~600 pages ≈ ~1000 sections
- ~1000 sections × ~1KB/section ≈ 1MB in-memory
- Acceptable trade-off for instant access

==== Include Graph

Tracked implicitly via `source_file` and `included_files`:

----
root_files = [main.adoc, other.adoc]
included_files = [_intro.adoc, _glossary.adoc]

Logical structure:
  main.adoc
    ├── Section from main.adoc
    ├── Section from _intro.adoc (included)
    └── Section from _glossary.adoc (included)
----

**Mental Model:** *"Includes are flattened during parsing, tracked for navigation"*

The parser resolves includes recursively, flattening the logical document tree while preserving file provenance for editing.
